# Running the pipeline

The pipeline code is available in [this repository](https://github.com/eqasim-org/ile-de-france).
To use the code, you have to clone the repository with `git`:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/eqasim-org/ile-de-france
```

which will create the `ile-de-france` folder containing the pipeline code. To
set up all dependencies, especially the [synpp](https://github.com/eqasim-org/synpp) package,
which is the code of the pipeline code, we recommend setting up a Python
environment using [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/):

```bash
cd ile-de-france
conda env create -f environment.yml
```

This will create a new Anaconda environment with the name `ile-de-france`.

To activate the environment, run:

```bash
conda activate ile-de-france
```

Now have a look at `config.yml` which is the configuration of the pipeline code.
Have a look at [synpp](https://github.com/eqasim-org/synpp) in case you want to get a more general
understanding of what it does. For the moment, it is important to adjust
two configuration values inside of `config.yml`:

- `working_directory`: This should be an *existing* (ideally empty) folder where
the pipeline will put temporary and cached files during runtime.
- `data_path`: This should be the path to the folder where you were collecting
and arranging all the raw data sets as described above.
- `output_path`: This should be the path to the folder where the output data
of the pipeline should be stored. It must exist and should ideally be empty
for now.
- `output_formats`: This should specify the formats of outputs. Available formats are
csv, gpkg, parquet and geoparquet. Default value is csv and gpkg: ["csv", "gpkg"].

To set up the working/output directory, create, for instance, a `cache` and a
`output` directory. These are already configured in `config.yml`:

```bash
mkdir cache
mkdir output
```

Everything is set now to run the pipeline. The way `config.yml` is configured
it will create the relevant output files in the `output` folder.

To run the pipeline, call the [synpp](https://github.com/eqasim-org/synpp) runner:

```bash
python3 -m synpp
```

It will automatically deshptect the `config.yml`, process all the pipeline code
and eventually create the synthetic population. You should see a couple of
stages running one after another. Most notably, first, the pipeline will read all
the raw data sets to filter them and put them into the correct internal formats.

After running, you should be able to see a couple of files in the `output`
folder:

- `meta.json` contains some meta data, e.g. with which random seed or sampling
rate the population was created and when.
- `persons.csv` and `households.csv` contain all persons and households in the
population with their respective sociodemographic attributes.
- `activities.csv` and `trips.csv` contain all activities and trips in the
daily mobility patterns of these people including attributes on the purposes
of activities.
- `activities.gpkg` and `trips.gpkg` represent the same trips and
activities, but in the spatial *GPKG* format. Activities contain point
geometries to indicate where they happen and the trips file contains line
geometries to indicate origin and destination of each trip.


:::{warning} Windows users :

The cache file paths can get very long and may break the 256 characters limit in the Microsoft Windows OS. In order to avoid any issue make sure the following regitry entry is set to **1** : `HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\FileSystem\LongPathsEnabled`

You should also set git into *long path mode* by calling : `git config --system core.longpaths true`
:::


## Mode choice

The synthetic data generated by the pipeine so far does not include transport modes (car, bike, walk, pt, ...) for the individual trips as assigning them consistently is a more computation-heavy process (including routing the individual trips for the modes). To add modes to the trip table, a light-weight MATSim simulation needs to be performed. For that, please configure the additional data requirements as described in the procedure to run a MATSim simulation:

- [Running a MATSim simulation](https://github.com/eqasim-org/ile-de-france/blob/develop/docs/simulation.md)

After that, you can change the `mode_choice` entry in the pipeline configuration file `config.yml` to `true`:

```yaml
config:
  mode_choice: true
```

Running the pipeline again will add the `mode` colum to the `trips.csv` file and its spatial equivalent.

## Population projections

The pipeline allows to make use of population projections from INSEE up to 2070. The same methodology can also be used to scale down the population. The process takes into account the marginal distribution of sex, age, their combination, and the total number of persons. The census data for the base year (see above) is reweighted according to those marginals using *Iterative Proportional Updating*.

- To make use of the scaling, [download the projection data from INSEE](https://www.insee.fr/fr/statistiques/5894093?sommaire=5760764). There are various scenarios in Excel format that you can choose from. The default is the *Scénario centrale*, the central scenario. 
- Put the downloaded file into `data/projection_2021`, so you will have the file `data/projection_2021/00_central.xlsx`

Then, activate the projection procedure by defining the projection year in the configuration:

```yaml
config: 
  # [...]
  projection_year: 2030
```

You may choose any year (past or future) that is contained in the projection scenario Excel file. In case you want to use a different scenario, download the corresponding file, put it into the folder mentioned above, and choose the scenario name via configuration:

```yaml
config: 
  # [...]
  projection_scenario: 00_central
```

## Urban type

The pipeline allows to work with INSEE's urban type classification (unité urbaine) that distinguishes municipalities in *center cities*, *suburbs*, *isolated cities*, and unclassified ones. To impute the data (currently only for some HTS), activate it via the configuration:

```yaml
config:
  # [...]
  use_urban_type: true
```

In order to make use of it for activity chain matching, you can set a custom list of matching attributes like so:

```yaml
config:
  # [...]
  matching_attributes: ["urban_type", "*default*"]
```

The `*default*` trigger will be replaced by the default list of matching attributes.

Note that not all HTS implement the urban type, so matching may not work with some implementations. Most of them, however, contain the data, we just need to update the code to read them in.

To make use of the urban type, the following data is needed:
- [Download the urban type data from INSEE](https://www.insee.fr/fr/information/4802589). The pipeline is currently compatible with the 2023 data set (referencing 2020 boundaries). 
- Put the downloaded *zip* file into `data/urban_type`, so you will have the file `data/urban_type/UU2020_au_01-01-2023.zip`

Then, you should be able to run the pipeline with the configuration explained above.

## Exclude entreprise with no employee

The pipeline allows to exclude all entreprise without any employee (trancheEffectifsEtablissement is NA, "NN" or "00") indicated in Sirene data for working place distribution. It can be activate via this configuration :

```yaml
config:
  # [...]
  exclude_no_employee: true
```

## INSEE 200m tiles data

The pipeline allows to use INSEE 200m tiles data in order to locate population instead of using BAN or BDTOPO data. Population is located in the center of the tiles with the INSEE population weight for each tile.

- In order to use of this location,[download the 200m grid data from INSEE](https://www.insee.fr/fr/statistiques/7655475?sommaire=7655515). The pipeline is currently compatible with 2019 data set.
- Put the downloaded *zip* file into `data/tiles_2019`, so you will have the file `data/tiles_2019/Filosofi2019_carreaux_200m_gpkg.zip`

Then, activate it via the configuration :

```yaml
config:
  # [...]
  home_location_source: tiles
```

This parameter can also activate use of BDTOPO data only or with BAN data to locate population with respectively `building` and `addresses` values.

## Education activities locations

The synthetic data generated by the pipeline so far distribute population to education locations without any distinction of age or type of educational institution.
To avoid to send yound children to high school for example, a matching of educational institution and person by age range can be activated via configuration :

```yaml
config:
  # [...]
  education_location_source: weighted
```

For each type of institution, a weight is attributed by default in the pipeline. To realise a matching weighted with known student numbers by educational institution, the pipeline can also work with a list of educational institution from external geojson or geopackage file with `addresses` as parameter value.
This file must include `TYPEQU`, `commune_id`,`weight`and `geometry` as column with `weight` number of student and `TYPEQU` type of educational institution code similar as BPE ones.

```yaml
config:
  # [...]
  education_location_source: adresses
  education_file: education/education_addresses.geojson
```

## Income

This pipeline allows using the [Bhepop2](https://github.com/tellae/bhepop2) package for income assignation. 

By default, Eqasim infers income from the global income distribution by municipality from the Filosofi data set. 
An income value is drawn from this distribution, independent of the household characteristics. This method is called
`uniform`.

Bhepop2 uses income distributions on subpopulations. For instance, Filosofi provides distributions depending on household size.
Bhepop2 tries to match all the available distributions, instead of just the global one. This results in more
accurate income assignation on subpopulations, but also on the global synthetic population. 
See the [documentation](https://bhepop2.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) for more information on the affectation algorithm.

To use the `bhepop2` method, provide the following config:

```yaml
config:
  income_assignation_method: bhepop2
```

Caution, this method will fail on communes where the Filosofi subpopulation distributions are missing. In this case,
we fall back to the `uniform` method.
